Assimilation :: a cognitive process that describes how we take in new information and incorporate that new information into our existing knowledge.
Object Permanence :: Jean Piaget's developmental concept. Describes children truely understanding certain things about physics and objects.
Conservation :: conservation of Mass. Children don't understand that just because it looks bigger, doesn't mean that there's more.
Germinal Phase :: Conception to 2 weeks. Basically just fertilized. It's a zygote.
Fetal :: 3rd Month: Digestive organs begin to function. 4th Month: Face looks human. Lower body outgrows head. Bones are defined. 5th: Nails, Lanugo and Vernix appear. 6th Month: Eybrows/Eyelashes form. 7th Month: Fetus considered cabable of life outside uterus.
Embryonic :: 2 to 8 weeks. Head, face and neck develop. Buds for limbs form and grow. Major organs/digestive system differentiating. Heartbeat Begins.
Cephalocaudal :: "Top to bottom" motor skills emerge from head to feet.
Oral stage :: First stage. Infant has oral fixation.
Genital stage :: Post/During Phallic-Oedipal stage. The individual develops a strong sexual interest in people outside of the family.
Phallic-Oedipal stage :: Third stage - 3 to 6 years of age. The father-son competition for sexual possession of the mother.
Anal stage :: Second stage in Frued's Developmental Theory. Has to do with the ability of a child to control when they go to the bathroom. 18 Months to 3 Years.
General Adaptation Syndrome :: All types of stressful situations lead to a similar stress response consisting of three stages.
Alarm [General Adaptation Syndrome] :: The body releases adrenal hormones, sympathetic nervous system.
Resistance [General Adaptation Syndrome] :: Body is on 'high alert'
Exhaustion [General Adaptation Syndrome] :: Increased physiological vulnverability to stress.
Imaginary Audience :: Refers to an egocentric state where an individual imagines and believes that multitudes of people are enthusiastically listening to or watching him or her. Though this state is often exhibited in young adolescence, people of any age may harbor a fantasy of an imaginary audience.
Personal Fable :: View him/herself as somehow unique/important to the ‘story’ of life.
Invincibility Fable :: Related to Elkind's adolecent egocentricism. Feelings of invincibility which accompany the the 'Personal Fable'.
Internal Locus of Control :: people believe they are responsible for what happens to them
Locus of Control :: the degree to which people perceive the control of rewards as internal to the self or external to the environment.
External Locus of Control :: people believe their lives are controlled by luck, fate or other people.
Sense of Congruence :: when sense of self and the person are consistent it allows positive functioning.
Sense of Incongruence :: sense of self/person in conflict
Big Five :: CANOE
Conscientiousness :: Organized / Careful / Self-Disciplined
Agreeableness :: Softhearted / Trusting / Helpful
Neuroticism :: Worried / Insecure / Self-Pitying
Openness :: Imaginitive / Variety / Independent
Extraversion :: Social / Fun Loving / Affectionate
Displaced Aggression [Maladaptive Coping Strategies] :: Harmful act to someone verbally or physically, who is not actually the true “object” of the hostility.
Catharsis [Maladaptive Coping Strategies] :: Realse of emotional tension.
Self-Indulgence [Maladaptive Coping Strategies] :: Compensate for depreived/frustrated feelings by trying to promote a feeling of satisfaction in another area.
Repression :: The subconsious obscuring of anxiety causing impulses or thoughts.
Regression :: Avoiding anxiety by regressing to an earlier developmental period in life. A first born child might react to a second being born by acting younger. A man in a mid-life crisis might begin to behave irrisponsibly- buying a sports car, dating younger women, etc.
Projection :: Seeing your anxiety causing unconsious urges appear in other people's behavior. For example, the husband who is gradually feeling unfaithful will suspect his spouse of infidelity.
Reaction Formation :: Unconsciously recognizing anxiety causing desires and supressing them by acting outwardly in the exact opposite way. You want to steal something- you tell your friend you hate those who steal. Another axample would be a closet homosexual gay-basher.
Sublimation :: The satiation of the id's desires in a socially acceptable way.
Self-Esteem :: The extent to which an individual likes, values and accepts the self. People high in self-esteem live happier, healthier lives. People low in self-esteem tend to perceive rejection in ambiguous feedback.
Self-Concept :: explicit knowledge of one’s own behaviors, traits and characteristics.
Self-Advocacy :: hmm. 
Self-Efficacy :: Belief one can set out to accomplish tasks/goals. Acquired from 4 sources. Mastery of new skills, overcome obstacles. Successful and competent role models. Positive feedback and encouragement. Awareness of feelings/manage responses.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder :: Continuous feelings of worry, anxiety. Dread/foreboding. Restlessness. Difficulty concentrating. Irritability. Muscle tension. Sleep disturbance.
Panic Disorder :: Recurring attack of intense fear or panic accompanied by feelings of impending doom or death. Symptoms include: Trembling, shaking, dizziness, chest pain, sweating, heart palpitations, hot/cold flashes, sense of losing control.
Bi-Polar Disorder :: Cycle through depression and mania. At least one manic episode with history of depression. Responsive to lithium and other mood stabilizers. Problem with compliance: miss the high. Can be adaptive, healthy and contributing members of society.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder :: Preoccupied with details that major point of activity is lost. Rules are essential. Particular . Serious and formal. Work gives pleasure. Reluctant to work with others unless they submit to doing things “exactly” his/her way.
Dissociative Identity Disorder :: (multiple personality disorder) The appearance of 2 or more distinct identities within one person.
Dependent Personality Disorder :: Submissive and clinging behavior. Excessive need to be taken care of. Difficulty making decisions without an excessive amount of advice to reassurance from others. Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of support or approval. Feels helpless when alone and goes to great lengths to get nurturance from others.
Conversion Disorder :: Loss of physical function with no organic basis, usually a specific area or system affected.
Conduct Disorder :: Violate social norms. Physical aggression. Cruelty to animals. Lack remorse. May be a precursor to antisocial personality.
Somatization Disorder :: History of diverse physical complaints which are psychological in origin.
Hypochondriasis :: Excessive preoccupation with health concerns/worry about developing illnesses.
Personality Disorders :: Rigid, maladaptive traits that cause great distress or lead to an inability to get along with others, or to function well in the world.
Humanistic therapy :: belief that people need to be supported and set the pace of their own therapy. (Rogers). Basic principles include: Unconditional positive regard. Help build self esteem and feelings of acceptance with genuineness and empathy.
Systematic Desensitization :: Behavioral Therapy developed by Wolpe to help individuals suffering from phibias.
Stress Inoculation :: Helps cope with stressful situations by exposing the patient to a variety of moderated, stressful situations.
Flooding :: Immersion into the feared situation / circumstance as an intervention to decrease the phobic/feared response. Form of exposure.
Norm of Reciprocity [Persuasion Tactics] :: The golden rule; to get you to comply with a request you are given an unsolicited favor or gift. [The Krishna tactic]
Door in the Face Technique [Persuasion Tactics] :: Persuader makes a large request expecting you to reject and then makes a smaller request believeing you will be more likely to comply.
Foot in the Door [Persuasion Tactics] :: A persuader gets you to comply witha  small request and then presents a larger request you will now be more likely to comply with.
Low-Balling [Persuasion Tactics] :: the persuader gets you to commit to an action. Once you do, the "cost increases".
Passionate Love :: Intesely emotional and physcial.
Companionate Love :: Deep affection, share emotional intimacy and friendship.
Commitment :: Efforts to maintain the relationship with difficulties.
Intimiacy [Sternberg TKriangular Theory of Love] :: Encompasses feelings of attachment, closeness, connectedness, and bondedness.
Passion [Sternberg Triangular Theory of Love] :: Encompasses drives connected to both limerence and sexual attraction.
Commitment [Sternberg Triangular Theory of Love] :: Encompasses, in the short term, the decision to remain with another, and in the long term, plans made with that other.
Subtyping :: Rather than abandoning our stereotypes when we find evidence that does not support them, we tend to "slightly" modify them.
Discrimination :: treat people differently and unfairly based on group affiliation.
Illusory Correlation :: People tend to overestimate the number of confirmations of an association between social traits.
Self-Serving Bias :: We attribute our successes to personal factors and our failures to situational forces.
Fundamental Attribution Error :: In contrast to the self-serving bias, we assume other's failures are due to personal or internal factors.
Odd/eccentric :: paranoid, schizoid, schizotypal
Dramatic/Erratic :: antisocial, borderline, histrionic, narcissistic
Anxious/Inhibited :: ocpd, dependent, avoidant
Paranoid Personality Disorder :: Suspicious. Argumentative. Reluctant to confide in others because of fears information will be “used against” him/her. Looking out for trickery. Blame others and bears grudges.
Schizoid Personality Disorder :: Have very few if any friends or family relationships. Loner, choosing solitary activities. Indifferent to praise or criticism. Shows no warm or tender feelings to other people.
Schizotypal :: Bizarre or odd patterns in behavior. Old beliefs or magical thinking that influences behavior. Uses unusual words (vague, metaphorical). Inappropriate or constricted affect.
Antisocial Personality Disorder :: Likes to break rules/laws. Deceitful. Gladly take advantage of people. Lacks remorse. Can appear charming/friendly. Often intelligent. History of conduct disorder.
Borderline Personality Disorder :: Manipulative. Stable pattern of unstable relationships. Frantic efforts to avoid “abandonment”. Splitting: all good or bad. Self-mutilating behaviors. Impulsivity. Sexual promiscuity. Quick to anger.
Histrionic Personality Disorder :: Overly dramatic. Everything is a trauma. Attention seekers. Seductive. Not genuine. Dependent on others.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder :: Feelings of grandiosity. Sense of privilage. Feels special. Expect favors from others. Lacks empathy.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder :: Preoccupied with details that major point of activity is lost. Rules are essential. Particular . Serious and formal. Work gives pleasure. Reluctant to work with others unless they submit to doing things “exactly” his/her way.
Avoidant Personality Disorder :: Excessively sensitive to rejection. Socially withdrawn.
Dependent personality disorder :: Submissive and clinging behavior. Excessive need to be taken care of. Difficulty making decisions without an excessive amount of advice to reassurance from others. Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of support or approval. Feels helpless when alone and goes to great lengths to get nurturance from others.
Schizophrenia :: Psychosis or condition involving distorted perceptions of reality and an inability to function in most aspects of life.