Developmental Psychology :: Universal aspects of lifespan development from conception through death. Identifies cultural variations.
Germinal Phase :: Conception to 2 weeks
Zygote :: A fertilized egg. Divides and ompants itself in the wall of the uterus.
Placenta :: Structure that allows oxygen and nutrients to pass into fetus from mother's bloodstream. Allows waste to pass out.
Embryonic Stage :: (2 - 8 Weeks). Head, face and neck develop. Buds for limbs form and grow. Maor organs / digestive system differentiating. Heartbeat Begins.
Fetal Stage :: 8th week of prenatal development and onward.
Prenatal Development (Phases of development) :: Germinal Phase (Conception - 2 weeks) -> Embryonic Stage -> Fetal Stage
Lanugo :: Fine, wooly hair over the body.
Vernix :: Waxy coating that collects on the surface of the child.
Cephalocaudal :: "Top to bottom" motor skills emerge from head to feet.
Proximodistal :: "Inside-to-outside rule" motor skills emerge in a  sequence of center moving outward.
Teratogens :: Harmful toxins that affect development resulting in defect, damage or anomaly. The degeree to which teratogens will affect an infant can be determined by dose, age of child upon exposure, genetics, interaction with environment like stress, nutrition, or lack of medical care.
Consequences of Stress on a Prenatal Child :: Prolonged stress linked with prematurity at birth.
Consequences of Drug Use on Prenatal Child :: 
Thalidomide :: Chemical given to mothers during pregnancy for morning sickness that was later linked to grossly underdeveloped limbs and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). The negative effects of the drug eventually led to more structured drug regulations and development.
Affects of Smoking on Prenatal Children :: Tobacco is a mild stimulant, which causes increased fetal activity. Low birth weitght, perceptual and attentual problems, and increased chance of SIDS.
Affects of Marijuana on Prenatal Children :: Low birth weight, disturbed sleep in newborns, reduced attention to environment.
Affects of Heroin on Prenatal Children :: Premature birth weight, tremulous behavior, poor sleep, poor sucking and feeding, risk of SIDS.
Affects of Cocaine on Prenatal Children :: Premature size/weight, tremulous, high pitched crying, respiratory and regurgitation problems, rigidity, withdrawal symptoms, deformities.
Comoribidity :: The presence of one or more additional disorders co-occurring with a primary disease or disorder.
Physical Affects of Alcohol on Prenatal Children :: Alcohol is the leading teratogen in the United States. Causes growth retardation, head and facial abnormalities, mircrocephaly, skeletal, brain and heart damage.
Behavioral Affects of Alcohol on Prenatal Children :: Poor impulse control, poor attention, hyperactivity and cognitive deficits.
Fetal Alcohol Effects :: Some symptoms of FAS, but fewer physical symptoms (ARND).
Vision in Infants :: Poor fixation ability. Limited ability to discriminate color. Estimated visual acuity of between 20/200 ad 20/400. Preference for human faces.
Hearing in Infants :: Fetus can hear sounds around 6 months in utero. Recognizes mother's voice.
Taste and Smell in Infants :: Both present at birth. Preference for sweet things.
Touch in Infants :: Heat, cold, pressure and pain all present at birth.
Reflexes in Infants :: Inborn, automatic responses to a particular form of stimulation.
Rooting Reflex :: Survival value, stroke cheek and baby will turn head toward the stimulation.
Stepping Reflex :: Basis for complex motor skills. With bare feet touching the floor an infant will mimic a steping response. Disappears around 2 months.
Sucking Reflex :: Place a finger in mouth and baby will suck. Permits feeding.
Eyeblink reflex :: Shine a bright light or clap. They will close eyelids. Protects from strong stimulation.
Babinski Reflex :: Stroke the heel to see reactions of the toes which flex/fan out. Normal in infants. If it persists, can indicate neurological problems.
Gross and Fine Motor Development :: Individual children will differ, but the normative expectations for these skills and abilities are often called milestones. Many cross-cultural similarities have been identified.
Gender Differences in Child Development :: Boys ahead of girls in force and power. Girls ahead in fine motor and gross motors skills which involve good balance.
Temperament :: Relatively constant basic disposition which is inherent in a person that underlies and modulates his/her behavior.
Thomas and Chess :: Identified three basic temperaments for infants. Difficult, slow to warm, and easy.
Difficult (Infant Behavior) :: Often wail, cry, and are negative in new situation, eat and sleep irregularly.
Slow-to-Warm-Up (Infant Behavior) :: Often inactive, adapt slowly and can be withdrawn and show a negative mood.
Easy (Infant Behavior) :: Cheerful, adaptive, easily establish routines.
Goodness of Fit :: The match between the characteristics of the infant and his/her family is critical to development. Some are better matches than others.
Attachment :: The bond that children may form with a caregiver.
Stranger Anxiety :: Develops when infants are around 6-7 months ending around 18 months. If a stranger approaches, the infant becomes afraid and reaches for the caregiver for comfort and reassurance.
Securely Attached :: Child uses the parent as a safe base to explore. When separated, the child may not cry during absence but will seek contact when the parent returns. Decrease crying if parent present (60% of US infants)
Insecure Avoidant Attachment :: Unresponsive to parent when present, no disstress when they leave. React to stranger similar as to parent. Slow to greet parent when she returns. (20% of US infants)
Ambivalent/Resistant Attachment :: Seek closeness wiwth their parents. Fail to explore. Upon return display angry resistant behavior. Cannot be comforted. (15% of US infants)
Disorganized/Disoriented Attachment :: Greatest amount of insecurity. In reunion show disorganized. Confused behaviors. Mothers are more avoidant and inconsistent with a lack of sensitivity to infant's needs. (5% of US infants)
Authoritarian (Baumrind Parenting Style Research) :: Restrictive parenting. Insist on obedience. Preschoolers were moody. Easily annoyed. Unfriendly and less motivated.
Authoritative (Baumrind Parenting Style Research) :: Assume control with flexibility. Reasonable demands. Provide reasons for rules/decisions. Preschoolers were cheerful, social reasonable. Achievement oriented and cooperative.
Permissive (Baumrind Parenting Style Research) :: Accepting and lax with few demands. Preschoolers were impulsive, aggressive, bossy, self centered, low in independence and achievement.
Uninvolved (Maccoby Parenting Style Research) :: Removed or hostile parenting. Overwhelmed with own stressors. Have little time or energy to parent. Children of this parenting style are high in aggression, temper tantrums, perform poorly in classroom.
Attachment and Contact Comfort :: Hypothesized that animals/humans need warmth, comfort as a primary need.
Developmental Theories as Stage Theories :: Individuals must progress through stages in a particular order, stages build on each other. Progress is strongly related to age. Development is marked by discontinuities that result in dramatic transitions.
Frustration :: When the pursuit of a goal is prevented.
Stress :: Any circumstance that threatens or is percieved to threaten one's well being.
Conflict :: Two or more competing and incompatible goals appear.
Approach-approach conflicts [Three Types of Conflicts] :: a choice must be made between two desirable goals. The least stressful type of conflict.
Avoidance-avoidance Conflict [Three Types of Conflicts] :: A choice must be made between two unattractive goals.
Approach-avoidance Conflict [Three Types of Conflicts] :: A choice must be made about to achieve a goal which has both positive and negative attributes.
Change :: Any noteable difference in one's life which requires adaptation. Both positive and negitive life changes can be stressful.
Pressure :: expectations or deamands that one behave in a particular manner.
Kanner [Stress Research] :: Also studied stress in terms of "Daily Hassles"; the sum total of mundane life tasks combine to create significant levels of stress.
Stressors :: Specific events or chronic pressures that place demands on a person and/or threatens well-being.
Stress Inoculation Training :: Helps cope with stressful situations by exposing the patient to a variety of moderated, stressful situations.
Optimism :: People with more positive outlooks handle stress better.
Humor [Coping] :: The use of humor can help cope with stress; can defuse some situations.
Relaxation [Coping] :: Reduces tension by relaxing muscles in the body, slowing cortical activity, heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure.
Social Supports :: Precense of social supporst provide adaptive coping/release from pressures. Further underscores the benefit of family dinners. (<-- Okay Schreier)
Type A Personalities [Description] :: Competitive, Impatient
Type B Personalities [Description] :: Unconcerned with deadlines, chill.
Burnout :: Physical, emotional, and mental exhaustion caused by stress related to overworking. Usually leads to a breakdown, or apathy of some sort. (Unofficial definition -- I didn't have it on the slide)
Coping Activities for the Elderly :: Stay active. Stay in a community.
Do biological factors place women at greater risk than men for severe health consequences of STDs/STIs? :: Yes.
Do chlamydia and gonorrhea pose a particular risk to the health of women? :: Yes. Both can result in infertility if untreated.

General Adaptation Syndrome :: All types of stressful situations lead to a similar stress response consisting of three stages.
Alarm [General Adaptation Syndrome] :: The body releases adrenal hormones, sympathetic nervous system.
Resistance [General Adaptation Syndrome] :: Body is on 'high alert'
Exhaustion [General Adaptation Syndrome] :: Increased physiological vulnverability to stress.
Coping :: What strageties you use to buffer against the stress cycle. Active efforts to master, reduce or accept the demands created by stress.
Repressive coping :: avoiding the situation or thoughts of the stressor.
Rational coping :: Facing a stressor and working to overcome it.
Displaced Aggression [Maladaptive Coping Strategies] :: Harmful act to someone verbally or physically, who is not actually the true “object” of the hostility.
Catharsis [Maladaptive Coping Strategies] :: Realse of emotional tension.
Self-Indulgence [Maladaptive Coping Strategies] :: Compensate for depreived/frustrated feelings by trying to promote a feeling of satisfaction in another area.
Constructive Coping Strategies :: healthy efforts to deal with a stressful event making one more resilient to the stressor(s).
Problem Focused [Constructive Coping Strategies] :: How can we change the problem?
Emotion Focused [Constructive Coping Strategies] :: How can we change perceptions/reactions to the situation.
Humor :: The use of humor can help cope with stress; can defuse some situations
Relaxation :: Reduces tension by relaxing muscles in the body, slowing cortical activity, heart rate, respiration and blood pressure
Social Supports :: Presence of social supports provide adaptive coping/release from pressures. Further underscores the benefits of family dinners.
ABC Milgram Study [What voltage did they stop at?] :: 150 volts
ABC Twist [Good Smaritain Video] :: Time preassure was the greatest predictor -- rushed individuals were less likely to stop.
Psychotropic Medication [Biological Therapies] :: Alter the biochemistry of the brain.
Psychosurgery :: Lesion/destroy problematic areas of the brain to eliminate disruptive behaviors (lobotomy; ocd surgery)
Electrocunvulsive Therapy (ECT) :: Shock therapy; beneficial to those with severe depressions which are not reponsive to medication/therapy. Can lead to memory impairment. Unclear on why/how it works.
Trancranial Magnetic Stimulation :: Using a powerful pulsing magnet alterns neuronal activity in the brain; less invasive than ECT. Some studies show similar benefits with less negative side effects.
Phototherapy :: Exposure to bright lights, often used to treat SAD (Seasonal Affective Disorder)
Psychoanalysis :: based on Freudian principles believing in the impact of early childhood.
Free Association [Methods of Psychoanalysis] :: The patient says whatever comes to mind. Extrapolate meanings from there.
Psychodynamic Therapies :: Looks at unconscious conflics, defense mechanisms and symptom resolution in a broader manner than Freud. Still a form of "talk therapy"
Humanistic or Client-Centered Therapies :: Belief that people need to be supported and set the pace of their own therapy. (rogers) Basic principles include unconditional positive regard and helping the patient to build their self esteem and feelings of acceptance with genuineness and empathy.
Systematic Desensitization :: Step by step process of eliminating fear. Uses counterconditioning.
Counterconditioning :: Pairing relaxation techniques with feared situations. Based on reciprocal inhibition.
Reciprocal Inhibition :: When two responses inhibit each other, only one may exist at a time. Pioneered by Wolpe.
Aversion Therapy :: Substitutes punishment for reinforcement of a bad habit. Antabuse for alcaholics; shock for pedophiles.
Flooding :: Immersion into the feared situation / circumstance as an intervention to decrease the phobic/feared response. Form of exposure.
Cognitive Therapies :: Help identify beliefs and expectations which maintain problems and conflicts. Challenges distortions in thinking.
Cognitive Restructuring [Cognitive Therapies] :: Replace negative thinking with more realistic positive beliefs.
Congnitive Behavioral Therapies :: Includes a variety of behavioral elements, including modeling and rehearsal coupled with cognitive restructuring.
Family / Couples Therapy :: Focus on the dynamics in the family as a system with different rules, roles and motivations.
Group Therapy :: People with similar or different problems come together to provide support or strategies.
Social Psychology :: Examines the influence of social processes on the way people think, feel, and behave.
Attitudes :: A positive or negative evaluation reaction toward a person, object, or concept.
Attitude Strength :: The durability or impact of an attitude.
Durability [Attitude Strength] :: The ability of the attitude to persist over time.
Impact [Attitude Strength] :: The ability of the attitude to affect behavior or thoughts.
Initial Impressions [Social Cognition] :: Initial perceptions make a difference and have been shown to have strong effects.
Social Influence [Social Cognition] :: The precense of other energizes performance (Triplett)
Social Norms [Social Cognition] :: Shared expectations about thoughts, feelings, and behavior can vary by time and place; culturally sensitive.
Social Role [Social Cognition] :: A set of norms which characterize how people in specific social positions should behave.
Role Conflict [Social Cognition] :: Norms accompanying different roles may clash.
Conformity [Social Cognition] :: The adjustment of people's behavior, attitudes and beliefs to a group.
Informational Social Influence [Social Cognition] :: Follow the opinions of those we believe have accurate knowledge and believe they are doing right, "others are buying this product".
Normative Social Influence [Social Cognition] :: Conform to obtain rewards that come.
Situational Influence on Behaviors [Social Cognition] :: If we see others egaging in a behavior, we are likely to be influenced by it.
Cognitive Dissonance [Social Cognition] :: An unpleasant state that arises when a person recognizes inconsistencies in actions attitudes and beliefs.
Results [Asch Study] :: When people were alone, they got the answer correct. When in a group, only 25% appeared to remain completely independent in their answers. 
Presence of a Dissenter [Asch Study] :: When someone else dissents, he/she serves as a model and it significantly reduces conformity.
Group Size [Asch Study] :: Conformity increased by 5-35% when group size increased. This stabilized after the group grew to 5 in size.
Results [LaPiere Study] :: [This is a long one - I couldn't break it up into multiple parts, but all of it seems relevant] Attitudes do not necessarily determine or predict our behavior. Attitudes have a greater influence over our behaviors when we are aware of them and when they are strongly held. General attitudes predict general behaviors and specific attitudes predict specific behaviors.
Persuasion :: The deliberate effort to change or impact one's attitude.
Systematic Persuasion :: attitudes or beliefs changed by appeals to reason.
Heuristic Persuasion :: Attitudes or beliefs changed by appeals to habit or emotion.
Norm of Reciprocity [Persuasion Tactics] :: The golden rule; to get you to comply with a request you are given an unsolicited favor or gift. [The Krishna tactic]
Door in the Face Technique [Persuasion Tactics] :: Persuader makes a large request expecting you to reject and then makes a smaller request believeing you will be more likely to comply.
Foot in the Door [Persuasion Tactics] :: A persuader gets you to comply witha  small request and then presents a larger request you will now be more likely to comply with.
Low-Balling [Persuasion Tactics] :: the persuader gets you to commit to an action. Once you do, the "cost increases".
Obedience :: A form of compliance that occurs when people follow direct commands, usually from someone ina  position of authority.
Altruism :: Helping behavior. [This is an absurdly breif definition]
Results [Latane and Darley Bystander Research] :: Bystander won't help if they don't notice. They Notice --> Is it an Emergency? --> Am I responsible for this? --> Intervene
Matching Hypothesis :: People tend to opt for partners at their same level of attractiveness.
Gender Differences :: Found cross culturally; males place more emphasis on physical attraction; women on social status and financial resources; women more selective.
Passionate Love :: Intesely emotional and physcial.
Companionate Love :: Deep affection, share emotional intimacy and friendship.
Commitment :: Efforts to maintain the relationship with difficulties.
Intimiacy [Sternberg TKriangular Theory of Love] :: Encompasses feelings of attachment, closeness, connectedness, and bondedness.
Passion [Sternberg Triangular Theory of Love] :: Encompasses drives connected to both limerence and sexual attraction.
Commitment [Sternberg Triangular Theory of Love] :: Encompasses, in the short term, the decision to remain with another, and in the long term, plans made with that other.
Prejudice :: Negative attitudes towards people based on irelevant characteristics or unconfirmed details.
Stereotypes :: Characteristics we attribute to people based on their membership in a group.
Subtyping :: Rather than abandoning our stereotypes when we find evidence that does not support them, we tend to "slightly" modify them.
Discrimination :: treat people differently and unfairly based on group affiliation.
Illusory Correlation :: People tend to overestimate the number of confirmations of an association between social traits.
Self-Serving Bias :: We attribute our successes to personal factors and our failures to situational forces.
Fundamental Attribution Error :: In contrast to the self-serving bias, we assume other's failures are due to personal or internal factors.
Group Membership :: We Categorize ourselves as "In Group" or "Out Group" and view our members on more favorable terms.
Homogeneity Bias :: Believe those in the "out group" are all the same, although we see the diversity within our own group.
Sherif Results :: working on a commmon task or goal (Superordinate Goal) is an effective way to reduce in/out group conflict.
Fluid Intelligence :: The ability to see abstract relationships and draw logical inferences; the "processing part" of the brain.
Crystallized Intelligence :: The ability to retain and use knowledge that was acquired through experience.
Adolescent Egocentrism :: Way of thinking the world is focused on themselves 
Imaginary Audience :: Refers to an egocentric state where an individual imagines and believes that multitudes of people are enthusiastically listening to or watching him or her. Though this state is often exhibited in young adolescence, people of any age may harbor a fantasy of an imaginary audience.
Personal Fable :: View him/herself as somehow unique/important to the ‘story’ of life.
Invincibility Fable :: Related to Elkind's adolecent egocentricism. Feelings of invincibility which accompany the the 'Personal Fable'.
